ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 17 April 2019
doi: 10.3389/fcomm.2019.00013

Discrete Anatomical Coordinates for
Speech Production and Synthesis
M. Florencia Assaneo 1,2*, Daniela Ramirez Butavand 3 , Marcos A. Trevisan 1 and
Gabriel B. Mindlin 1
1

Department of IFIBA-Physics (FCEN), University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2 Department of Psychology,
New York University, New York, NY, United States, 3 Instituto de Biología Celular y Neurociencias, Medicine School, University
of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina

Edited by:
Niels Janssen,
Universidad de La Laguna, Spain
Reviewed by:
Peter Birkholz,
Dresden University of Technology,
Germany
Blaise Yvert,
Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale (INSERM),
France
*Correspondence:
M. Florencia Assaneo
fassaneo@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Language Sciences,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Communication
Received: 27 June 2018
Accepted: 27 March 2019
Published: 17 April 2019
Citation:
Assaneo MF, Ramirez Butavand D,
Trevisan MA and Mindlin GB (2019)
Discrete Anatomical Coordinates for
Speech Production and Synthesis.
Front. Commun. 4:13.
doi: 10.3389/fcomm.2019.00013

The sounds of all languages are described by a finite set of symbols, which are extracted
from the continuum of sounds produced by the vocal organ. How the discrete phonemic
identity is encoded in the continuous movements producing speech remains an open
question for the experimental phonology. In this work, this question is assessed by
using Hall-effect transducers and magnets—mounted on the tongue, lips, and jaw—to
track the kinematics of the oral tract during the vocalization of vowel-consonant-vowel
structures. Using a threshold strategy, the time traces of the transducers were converted
into discrete motor coordinates unambiguously associated with the vocalized phonemes.
Furthermore, the signals of the transducers combined with the discretization strategy
were used to drive a low-dimensional vocal model capable of synthesizing intelligible
speech. The current work not only assesses a relevant inquiry of the biology of language,
but also demonstrates the performance of the experimental technique to monitor the
displacement of the main articulators of the vocal tract while speaking. This novel
electronic device represents an economic and portable option to the standard systems
used to study the vocal tract movements.
Keywords: speech motor coordinates, articulatory speech synthesizer, experimental phonology, hall-effect
transducers, mathematical modeling

INTRODUCTION
Among all species, humans are within the very few that generate learned vocalizations and are,
by far, the species producing the more advanced ones (Petkov and Jarvis, 2012). This complex
process, that distinguishes us from other species, emerges as an interaction between the brain
activity and the physical properties of the vocal system. This interaction implies a precise control of
a set of articulators (lips, tongue, and jaw) to dynamically modify the shape of the upper vocal tract
(Levelt, 1993). The output of this process is the speech wave sound, which can be discretized and
represented by a finite set of symbols: the phonemes. Moreover, the phonemes across languages
can be hierarchically organized in terms of articulatory features, as described by the International
Phonetic Alphabet (International Phonetic Association, 1999) (IPA). On the other side of the
process, at the brain level, intracranial recordings registered during speech production have showed
that motor areas encode these articulatory features (Bouchard et al., 2013). Thus, an important
question arises: how does the continuous vocal tract movement which generates speech encode the
discrete phonemic information?
During speech, the articulators modify the vocal tract configuration allowing: (i) to filter the
sound produced by the oscillations of the vocal folds at the larynx (i.e., vowels) and (ii) to produce a

Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org

1

April 2019 | Volume 4 | Article 13

Assaneo et al.

Speech Discrete Anatomical Coordinates

University of Buenos Aires. Fifteen participants (9 females, age
range of 27 ± 4), also native Spanish speakers participated in the
audio tests.

turbulent sound source by occluding (i.e., stop consonants) or
constricting (i.e., fricatives) the tract (Stevens, 2000). Previous
work developed biophysical models for this process (Maeda,
1990; Story, 2013) and tested its capabilities to synthesize realistic
voice (Assaneo et al., 2016). In principle, those models could
have a high dimensionality, especially due to the many degrees of
freedom of the tongue (Maeda, 1990). However, their dimensions
ranges between 3 and 7, suggesting that a small number of
experimental measurements of the vocal tract movements should
be able to successfully decode speech and to feed the synthesizers.
In this study, the oral dynamics was monitored using sets of
Hall-effect transducers and magnets mounted on the tongue, lips
and jaw during the utterance of a corpus of syllables (including
all the Spanish vowels and voiced stop consonants). By applying
a threshold strategy on the signals recorded by three sensors,
it was possible to decode the uttered phonemes well above
chance. Moreover, the signals were used to drive an articulatory
synthesizer producing intelligible speech.
From a technical point of view, this work belongs to
the broad field of silent speech interfaces (Denby et al.,
2010; Schultz et al., 2017). This area of research attempts to
develop a device enabling speech communication even when
the acoustic speech signal is degraded or absent. Such a device
would serve for multiple applications, as for example: restoring
speech in paralyzed or laryngectomized patients, enhancing
communication under noisy environmental conditions and
providing private conversations within public spaces. Despite
the large amount of effort devoted to this topic during the last
years, the puzzle remains unsolved. Currently, four varieties
of solutions are being pursued, the difference between them
being on whether the reconstruction of the speech signal is
done: (i) neurophysiological measurements (Guenther et al.,
2009; Brumberg et al., 2010; Toda et al., 2012); (ii) non-audible
vibrations (Tran et al., 2010); (iii) the dynamic of the main
articulators involved in speech (Hueber et al., 2010; Bocquelet
et al., 2016; Stone and Birkholz, 2016); and from the electrical
signal produced by the muscles responsible for the articulators’
movements (Meltzner et al., 2011; Deng et al., 2012). The device
described in the current work represents an alternative method—
portable and inexpensive—embraced within the third category
of solutions.

Experimental Device for the Anatomical
Recordings
Following the procedure described by Assaneo et al. (2013) 3
Hall-effect transducers (Ratiometric Linear Hall Effect Sensor
ICs for High-Temperature Operation, A1323 Allegro) and 4
small biocompatible Sm-Co magnets (1–3 g) were mounted on
the subject’s upper vocal tract to record the displacement of
the articulators (jaw, tongue, and lips; Figure 1A). The position
of the elements was chosen in a way that each transducer
signal was modulated by a subset of magnets (color code in
Figure 1B). The upper teeth transducer signal represented an
indirect measurement of aperture of the jaw, the lips transducer
signal the roundness and closure of the lips and the palate
transducer gave an indirect measure of the position of the tongue
within the oral cavity.
Participants wore a removable plastic dental cast of the
superior and inferior dentures (1 mm thick, Figure 1A) during
the experiments. Transducer and magnets were glued to the
plastic molds using cyanoacrylate glue (Crazyglue, Archer, Fort
Worth, TX). Denture adhesive (Fixodent Original Denture
Adhesive Cream 2.4 Oz) was used to attach magnets to the tongue
and medical paper tape (3M Micropore Medical Tape) to fix the
transducers to the lips.
Details of the configuration of the 3 magnet-transducer sets
are shown in Figure 1B.

Red, Lips
One cylindrical magnet (3.0 mm diameter and 1.5 mm height)
was glued to the dental cast between the lower central incisors.
Another one (5.0 mm diameter and 1.0 mm height) was fixed at
the center of the upper lip. The transducer was attached at the
center of the lower lip. The magnets were oriented in such a way
that their magnetic field had opposite signs in the privileged axis
of the transducer.

Green, Jaw

MATERIALS AND METHODS

A spherical magnet (5.0 mm diameter) and the transducer were
glued to the dental casts, in the space between the canine and the
first premolar of the upper and lower teeth, respectively.

Ethics Statements

Blue, Tongue

All participants signed an informed consent to participate in
the experiment. The protocol was approved by the CEPI ethics
committee of Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, qualified by
ICH (FDA-USA, European Community, Japan) IRb00003580,
and all methods were performed in accordance with the relevant
guidelines and regulations.

A cylindrical magnet (5.0 mm diameter and 1.0 mm height) was
attached at a distance of about 15 mm from the tip of the tongue.
The transducer was glued to the dental plastic replica, at the
hard palate, ∼10 mm right over the superior teeth (sagittal plane).
Transducer wire was glued to the plastic replica and routed away
to allow free mouth movements.
The hall-effect transducers produce a voltage output
proportional to the magnetic field along their preferred axis.
Accordingly, their signals represent a combination of the
distance magnet-chip and the orientation of the magnet. In the
current state, this prototype operates with signals that do not
represent dimensional values of the articulator’s displacements.

Participants
Four individuals (1 female) within an age range of 29 ± 6 years
and with no motor or vocal impairments participated in the
recordings of anatomical and speech sound data. They were
all native Spanish speakers, graduate students working at the

Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org

2

April 2019 | Volume 4 | Article 13

Assaneo et al.

Speech Discrete Anatomical Coordinates

FIGURE 1 | Discrete coordinates are extracted from the time traces of three detectors in the oral cavity. (A) The dental plastic replica with a magnet and a Hall-effect
transducer. (B) Sketch of the position of the set of transducers (squares) and magnets (circles) in the oral cavity. In green the set tracking the jaw -the magnet and
transducer were glued to the molds at the upper and lower left canines, respectively. In blue the set tracking the tongue -the transducer fixed to the mold at the palate
and the magnet to the tip of the tongue. In red the set tracking the lips—the transducer fixed in the center of the lower lip, one magnet glued to the lower mold,
between the lower central incisors, and another in the center of the upper lip. Figure adapted from Assaneo et al. (2013). (C) Discretization of the signals. Upper panel:
VCV phonemes and sound wave. Lower panel: time traces of the transducers signals during the vocalizations. The intensity of the shaded regions differentiates the
discrete states. (D) States of vowels and consonants in the discrete motor space. The corners of the gray cube represent the vowels and the colored walls de
different consonants.

structures (VCVs) that were prompted on the screen starting
from (and ending to) a comfortable closed mouth configuration.
Each session incorporates the production of 75 VCVs strings,
including the whole set of Spanish vowels (/a/, /e/, /i/, /o/,
and /u/) and voiced plosive consonants (/b/, /d/, and /,g/). The
VCVs strings spanned all possible combinations (i.e., for /b/ the
following strings were used: /aba/, /abe/, /abi/, /abo/, /abu/, /eba/,
/ebe/, /ebi/, /ebo/, /ebu/, /iba/, /ibe/, /ibi/, /ibo/, /ibu/, /oba/, /obe/,
/obi/, /obo/, /obu/, /uba/, /ube/, /ubi/, /ubo/, and /ubu/).
The VCVs order was randomized for each session. The first 15
VCVs were defined as the training set. Thus, they were supervised
to include the same number of each phoneme (5 /b/, 5/g/, 5
/d/, 6 samples of each vowel). The speech sounds were recorded
simultaneously with the three signals of the transducers.
The consonants chosen for this study are produced by the
activation of different articulators. They represent the main
hierarchies used by IPA (Goldsmith et al., 2011) to categorize the
consonants according to their place of articulation: /b/ labial, /d/
coronal, and dorsal /g/.

Importantly, the specifications of the selected sensors make
them appropriate for the presented application (Allegro
MicroSystem)1 , some of their relevant features are: (i) internal
clock frequency of 150 KHz, (ii) operating ambient temperature
range from −40 to 150◦ C, and (iii) low cost, 5 pieces cost US$
13. It is worth noting that the particular device employed in
this work is no longer available, for future experiments the
A1326LUA-T could be used instead.

Recording Sessions
Four native Spanish speakers were instructed to vocalize a corpus
of syllables while wearing the device. The transducer signals
(hJ (t), hT (t), and hL (t) for the jaw, tongue, and lips, respectively)
were recorded simultaneously with the produced speech. Three
example of the three sensor signals and the corresponding
audio signal is shown in Figure 1C. Each participant completed
3 sessions on different days during a period of 1 month.
Participants, with the device mounted, sat in a silent room 20 cm
away from a microphone and in front of a computer screen.
They were instructed to repeat a set of vowel-consonant-vowel

Signals’ Preprocessing

1 Allegro MicroSystem. https://www.allegromicro.com/en/Products/MagneticLinear-And-Angular-Position-Sensor-ICs/Linear-Position-Sensor-ICs/A13212-3.aspx

Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org

Each transducer’s signal was subsampled at 441 Hz and
preprocessed within each session data set. The preprocessing

3

April 2019 | Volume 4 | Article 13

Assaneo et al.

Speech Discrete Anatomical Coordinates

signals hL (t), hJ (t), hT (t), and the threshold values vL , vJ , and vT
for the lips, jaw, and tongue, respectively, a vowel vo reads:


S∞ hJ (t) − νJ 
vo = S∞ hT (t) − vT 
(1)
S∞ hL (t) − vL

consisted in subtracting the resting state and dividing by the
maximum absolute value. The resting state value was estimated
as the average of the 50 ms previous and posterior of each
vocalization. This process set the signal’s value between −1 and 1.

Thresholds Adjustment
A previous study showed that applying one threshold for each
transducer was enough to decode the 5 Spanish vowels (Assaneo
et al., 2013). Following the same strategy, an extra threshold per
signal was added in order to include the stop consonants to
the description. Following this rationale, fitting two thresholds
allowed us to discretize the signals: a vowel threshold v, separating
vowels, and a consonant threshold c, separating vowels from
consonants. A visual exploration of the signals (see Figure 1C for
an example) suggested the following rules to fit the thresholds:
Vowels: the lips vL threshold divides vowels according to the
roundness of the lips (above: /u/ and /o/ below: /a/ /e/ and /i/);
the jaw vJ threshold differentiates close (/u/ and /i/, above) from
open (/a/ /e/ and /o/, below) vowels; the tongue vT threshold
separates front vowels (/e/ and /i/, above) from back (/a/ /o/ and
/u/, below) ones.
Consonants: the lips cL threshold differentiates /b/ (above)
from all other phonemes (below); the jaw cJ threshold
differentiates all stop consonants from all vowels (above: /g/ /b/
and /d/, below: (/a/ /e/ /i/ /o/ and /u/); the tongue cT threshold
separates /d/ (above) from all other phonemes.
These threshold rules defined three regions as the ones shown
in Figure 1C in shades of red for the lips, green for the jaw
and blue for the tongue. Associating the values 0, 1, and 2 to
the transducer signals falling within the light, medium, and dark
value ranges; the phonemes could be represented on a discrete 3dimensional motor space as shown in Figure 1D, were the first
coordinate represented the lips state, the second the jaw and the
third the tongue. Each vowel was represented by a unique vector:
/a/=(0,0,0); /e/=(0,0,1); /i/=(0,1,1); /o/=(1,0,0); /u/= (1,1,0);
while the consonants had multiple representations: /b/=(2,x,y),
/d/=(y,x,2), and /g/=(x,2,y), where x is 0, 1, or 2, and y is 0 or 1.
The thresholds were fixed independently for each transducer
signal, by choosing the value maximizing the decoding
performance over the training data set, according to the rules
detailed above. For example, for the tongue vocalic threshold the
rule was: /e/ and /i/ above (1) and /a/ /o/ and /u/ below (0).
The [-1; 1] range was discretized in 200 evenly spaced values,
and each value was tested as the threshold over the tongue’s
signals of the complete testing data set. The value with the highest
performance sorting the data according to the rule was selected as
the threshold.

A more general approach of a sigmoid function over a step one
was chosen because m-values smaller than infinity were used later
in this study.
Plosive consonants represented articulatory activations
reaching the dark areas of Figure 1C, assigned to the value 2.
In order to include them to the description, an extra saturating
function was added to each coordinate, using the consonant
thresholds cJ , cT , and cL . Following the previous notation,
phonemes p (either vowels or consonants) were represented in
the discrete space directly from the transducer signals as:

 

S∞ hJ (t) − vJ  + S∞ hJ (t) − cJ 
p =  S∞ hT (t) − vT + S∞ hT (t) − cT 
(2)
S∞ hJ (t) − vL + S∞ hL (t) − cL

Articulatory Synthesizer

Articulatory synthesis relies on the computational simulation
of the physical processes involved in the speech generation
phenomenon. During the past decades, many research has
focused on this topic and high quality speech signals have been
achieved (Browman and Goldstein, 1990; Story and Titze, 1995;
Lloyd et al., 2012; Birkholz et al., 2017). In the current study,
an articulatory synthesizer was chosen because it facilitates a
translation from physiological measurements to acoustic signals.
The goal was to test the suitability of our electronic device to
feed such a synthesizer in order to produce intelligible speech.
The quality of the synthesized voice was out of the scope of
this work. Thus, a simplified version of the artificial talker
described by Story was implemented (Story, 2013). Specifically,
the simplification consisted in replacing the realistic kinematic
model of the vocal folds for a first order approximation of the
glottal airflow, as proposed by Laje et al. (2001). Below, the used
articulatory synthesizer is broadly described, for more detail see
the previously mentioned works (Laje et al., 2001; Story, 2013).
During the production of voiced sounds, the vocal folds
oscillate producing a stereotyped airflow waveform (Titze and
Martin, 1998) that can be approximated by relaxation oscillations
(Laje et al., 2001) such as that produced by a van der Pol system:


(
du
u3
v
−
=
55f
+
u
0
3
dt
(3)
f0
dv
−
a)
=
11
(u
5
dt

Mathematical Description for the
Discretization Process

The glottal airflow is the variable u for u > 0, and u = 0 else.
The fundamental frequency of the glottal flow is f 0 (Hz) and the
oscillations’ onset is attained for a > −1.
The pressure perturbations produced by the injection of
airflow at the entrance of the tract propagate along the vocal tract.
The propagation of sound waves in a pipe of variable cross section
A(x) follows a partial differential equation (Landau and Lifshitz,
1987). Approximations have been proposed to replace this

The transformation from continuous transducer signals to
discrete values can be mathematically accomplished through

saturating functions of the form: Sm (x) = 1/ 1 + e−mx . This
function goes from zero to one in a small interval around x=0,

whose size is inversely proportional to m. Then, S∞ h (t) − v is
zero for h(t)<v and one for h(t)>v. These are the conditions that
define the binary coordinates for vowels. Using the transducer

Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org

4

April 2019 | Volume 4 | Article 13

Assaneo et al.

Speech Discrete Anatomical Coordinates

1996). The second factor represents the consonant occlusion.
It takes the value 1 except for an interval of width rc around
the point x = xc , where it smoothly decreases to 1-wc and
therefore represents a local constriction in the vocal tract,
active during a plosive consonant. Thus, xc and rc define
the place and the length of the occlusion, respectively, and
confer the identity to the consonant. The parameter wc goes
to one during the consonant occlusion and stays in zero in
other case.
This description of the anatomy of the vocal tract fits
well with our discrete representation. A previous study
(Assaneo et al., 2013) showed that a simple map connects
the discrete space and the morphology of the vocal tract for
vowels. It is carried out by a simple affine transformation
defined by:

equation by a series of coupled ordinary differential equations,
as the wave-reflection model (Liljencrants, 1985; Story, 1995;
Murphy et al., 2007) and the transmission line analog (Flanagan,
2013). Those models approximate the pipe as a concatenation
of N=44 tubes of fixed cross-section Ai and length li . In the
transmission line analog, the sound propagation along each tube
follows the same equations as the circuit shown in Figure 2,
where the current plays the role of the airflow u and the voltage
the role of sound pressure p. The flows u1 , u2, and u3 along the
meshes displayed in Figure 2, follow the set of equations:

Gi−1

ü1i =ü3(i−1) +h Ci (u̇2i − u̇1i )
i

−u2i
1
1i
ü2i = Li +Lw
ü3i Lwi + u1iC−u
+ u3iCw
+ (u̇3i − u̇2i ) Rwi − u̇2i Ri (4)
i
i
i
h
i


u
−u
ü =
ü + 1 u2i −u3i + (u̇ − u̇ ) Rw + 1(i+1) 3i
3i

2i

Lwi

Cwi

2i

3i

i

Gi



The components Li , Ci , Ri , and Gi represent the acoustic
inheritance, the air compressibility, the power dissipated in
viscous friction and the heat conduction at the tube wall,
respectively. The components marked with w account for the
vibration of the walls of the tract and the mesh for the last
tube (i = N) includes elements (Rf and Lf ) that account for the
mouth radiation. For a complete description of the model and the
numerical parameters (see Flanagan, 2013).
Speech was synthesized using the glottal airflow u as input for
the first circuit i = 1 (Figure 2), which represents the entrance to
the tract. Then, the propagation of the sound along the vocal tract
was modeled through N sets of Equation (4).
Importantly, Li , Ci , Ri , and Gi are functions of the crosssection and length of the i-th tube. More precisely: Li = Aρi , Ci =
q
q
η−1
ωρµ
Ai
λω
S
and
G
=
S
,
R
=
i
i
2
2
2
2
2cp ρ ; where A
ρc
A
ρc


wc (t) = Sm hL (t) − cL , xc = 44, rc = 4 for /b/
wc (t) = Sm hT (t) − cT , xc = 39, rc = 6 for /d/
wc (t) = Sm hJ (t) − cJ , xc = 29, rc = 10 for /g/

(7)

The parameters xc and rc are in units of a vocal tract
segmented in 44 parts, starting from the vocal tract entrance
(xc = 1) to the mouth (xc = 44). The values were fixed
according to a previous work (Story, 2005), in which they
were optimized to minimize the squared difference between the
area functions generated by the model and the corresponding
MRI anatomical data. More precisely, we adopted the values
reported for the unvoiced version of each consonant (i.e., the
values reported for /p/, /t/, /k/ were selected for /b/, /d/,
/g/, respectively).
This completed the path that goes from discretized transducer
signals hJ (t), hT (t), and hL (t) to the shape of the vocal tract A(x,t)
for vowels and plosive consonants.

Discrete States to Vocal Tract Anatomies
The shape of the vocal tract can be mathematically described
by its cross-sectional area A(x) at distance x from the glottal
exit to the mouth. Moreover, previous works (Story, 1995; Story
and Titze, 1996; Story et al., 1996) developed a representation
in which the vocal tract shape A(x) for any vowel and plosive
consonant can be expressed as:
i
2 h
2
π 
 (x) + q1 ϕ1 (x) + q2 ϕ2 (x) 1 − wc e− ln(16)[(x−xc )/rc ]
4

(5)
The first factor in square brackets represents the shape of the
vocal tract for vowels, the vowel substrate. The function Ω(x)
is the neutral vocal tract, and the functions φ 1 (x) and φ 2 (x)
are the first empirical modes of an orthogonal decomposition
calculated over a corpus of MRI anatomical data for vowels
(Story et al., 1996). The shape of the vowels is determined
by fixing just two coefficients, q1 and q2 (Story and Titze,

Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org

(6)

The numerical values of the transformation were
phenomenologically found to correctly map the discrete
states to the vowel coefficients q1 and q2 . Together, Equations
(5, 6) allowed the reconstruction of the vocal tract shape of the
different vowels from the transducer signals.
During plosive consonants, the vocal tract was occluded at
different locations. In our description, this corresponded to
have a value 2 in one or more coordinates, which means that
the transducers signal crosses the consonant threshold c. The
saturating functions with the consonant threshold were used
to control the parameter wc of Equation (5) that controls the
constriction. More specifically, the following equations were used
to generate the consonants:

and S are the cross section and the circumference of the i-th
tube, respectively, ρ is the air density, c the sound velocity, µ
the viscosity coefficient, λ the coefficient of heat conduction, η
the adiabatic constant, cp is the specific heat of air at constant
pressure and ω is the sound frequency. Thus, the vocal tract
shape is required in order to solve the set of equations defining
the flow.

A (x) =



  

 S h (t) − vL

4
q (t)
−2 −4 −5.5  ∞ L
S∞ hJ (t) − vJ  +
= 1
1
q2 (t)
−3 −1 2
S∞ hT (t) − vT

Vocal Tract Dynamics Driven by
Transducers’ Data
To produce continuous changes in a virtual vocal tract controlled
by the transducers, it was necessary to replace the step functions
of Equations (6, 7) by smooth transitions from 0 to 1. Therefore,

5

April 2019 | Volume 4 | Article 13

Assaneo et al.

Speech Discrete Anatomical Coordinates

FIGURE 2 | Articulatory synthesizer. Sketch of the model used for the vocal system. The glottal airflow (u) is obtained by solving a Van del Pol system (Laje et al.,
2001). The vocal tract is approximated by a concatenation of N = 44 tubes of different cross-sectional areas Ai and lengths li . The lower panels show the equivalent
electrical transmission line used to simulate the propagation of the sound along the ith and the last tube (N), respectively.

vowel’s production—into the experimental (F1 ,F2 ) regions, as
shown in Figure 3.

the condition m = ∞ was replaced by finite steepness values
m1 , m2 and m3 . The values used to synthesize continuous
speech were m1 = 300, m2 = 300, and m3 = 900 for
lips, tongue, and jaw, respectively. These numerical values
were manually fixed with the following constrain: applying
Equation (6) over the recorded signals during the stable part
of the vowels, and using the obtained (q1 , q2 ) to synthesize
speech should produce recognizable vowels. This process is
explained below.
First, the mean values of the transducer signals during the
production of vowels for one participant were computed (left
panel Figure 3). More precisely, just the set of corrected decoded
vowels for subject 1, using the intersession threshold, were
selected. Second, different exploratory sets of (m1 ,m2 ,m3 ) were
used to calculate the corresponding (q1 , q2 ) , by means of
Equation (6). Then, the given vocal shapes [A(x) in Equation
(5)] were reconstructed and the vocalic sounds were synthetized,
from which the first two formants were extracted using Praat
(Boersma and Weenink, 2011). Each set of (m1 ,m2 ,m3 ) produced
a different transformation from the sensor space to the formants
space (Figure 3).
The first two formants of a vocalic sound define its
identity (Titze, 1994); its variability for real vocalizations
of Spanish vowels is represented by the shaded areas on
the right panel of Figure 3 according to previous reported
results (Aronson et al., 2000). The chosen steepness values
(m1 = 300, m2 = 300, and m3 = 900) converted more
than 90% of the transducer data—obtained during the

Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org

Synthetic Speech
To synthesize speech it was necessary to solve the set of equations
described in the Articulatory synthesizer section (Equations
3, 4). In order to simulate the glottal flow a value for the
pitch (f0 ) was needed; and to solve the electric analog for the
discretized tube the vocal tract shape was required. The pitch
value was extracted using Praat (Boersma and Weenink, 2011)
from the speech recordings. The time evolution of the vocal
tract shape was reconstructed from the recording signals using
Equations (5–7). Videos of the vocal tract dynamics driven by the
transducers are available at Supplementary Material for different
VCV structures.
Audio wav files were generated using the transducers’ time
traces and the pitch contours produced by one of the participants
while vocalizing: /oga/, /agu/, /ogu/, /oda/, /odi/, /ide/, /ibu/, /iba/,
/obe/ (data available as Supplementary Material). The audio files
were generated by integrating Equations (3, 4) in N = 44 tubes,
using a Runge-Kutta 4 algorithm (Press et al., 2007) coded in C at
a sampling rate of 44.1 kHz. The sound intensity of the files was
equalized at 50 dB.
Fifteen participants using headphones (Sennheister HD202)
listened to the synthetic speech trials in random order. They
were instructed to write down a VCV structure after listening
to each audio file. The experiment was written in Psychtoolbox
(Brainard, 1997).

6

April 2019 | Volume 4 | Article 13

Assaneo et al.

Speech Discrete Anatomical Coordinates

FIGURE 3 | Mapping the transducer signals into the formants space. The left panel shows the mean values hJ , hT and hL of the transducer signals during the
utterance of vowels by one participant. Each dot represents a vowel, colors stands for the vowel’s identity (/a/ is black, /e/ red, /i/ blue, /o/ green, /u/ yellow). The right
panel maps each point in the transducers space to the formants space as described above, for (m1 ,m2 ,m3 ) = (300,300,900). The shaded regions represent the
experimental variation in the formants F 1 and F 2 for Spanish vowels (Aronson et al., 2000).

RESULTS

session were used as training set, i.e., to fix the thresholds (see
Table S1 for the numerical values). The following 60 VCVs of the
corresponding session were used as the test set, i.e., to calculate
the decoding performance using the thresholds optimized on the
training set.
Figure 4A shows the confusion matrix obtained by averaging
the decoding performance across participants and sessions
(see Figure S1 for each participant’s confusion matrix). Every
phoneme was decoded with performances well above chance
levels. This result validates the discretization strategy and
discloses a discrete encoding of the phonemic identity in the
continuous vocal tract movements.

From Continuous Dynamics to a Discrete
Motor Representation
A visual inspection of the data revealed that the sensors’ signals
executed rapid excursions during the transitions in order to
reach the following state (see Figure 1C) and that the signals
were bounded to the same range of values during different
vocalizations of the same phoneme. These observations invited
us to hypothesize that each phoneme could be described in a
three dimensional discrete space by adjusting thresholds over the
signals. This hypothesis was first mathematically formalized (see
section Materials and Methods) and then tested using training
and test sets to extract the thresholds and compute the decoding
performance, respectively.
It is worth noting that sensors provided articulatory
information beyond the ones collected here for signal
discretization using thresholds. For instance, the brief bumps
present around /g/ in Figure 1 were not common across subjects,
but rather the signature of a particular speaker or speech habit.
We leave for future work a characterization of the continuous
signals (for instance using machine learning techniques) to find
speech patterns and/or to characterize speakers.

Decoding Performance: Intra-subject and
Inter-session
The previous result led to the question of whether thresholds
could be defined for each participant, independently of the
variations in the device mounting across sessions. To explore
this, the VCV data of all sessions were pooled together for
each participant. Then, the 10% of the data was used to
adjust thresholds and the performance was tested on the rest.
More specifically, a 50-fold cross-validation was performed over
each subject’s data set. The confusion matrix of Figure 2B
exposes the confusion matrix obtained by averaging the decoding
performance across participants (see Figure S2 for individual
participant’s confusion matrixes and Table S1 for the mean value
and standard deviation of the 50 thresholds). The performance
remained well above chance for every phoneme, with the only
one exception of the vowel /e/, that was confused with /a/. As

Decoding Performance: Intra-subject and
Intra-session
To perform the decoding it was necessary to define the threshold
values. In this case, one set of thresholds was adjusted for each
participant and session. More precisely, the first 15 VCVs of the

Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org

7

April 2019 | Volume 4 | Article 13

Assaneo et al.

Speech Discrete Anatomical Coordinates

FIGURE 4 | Decoding performance of the discrete representation. (A) Confusion matrix using one set of thresholds per session. Average across sessions and
participants. (B) Confusion matrix using one set of thresholds per participant. Average across participants. (C) Confusion matrix computed using one set of thresholds
for all participants. Numerical values above 20% are displayed for visualization purposes. Thresholds values and matrix means with standard deviations are shown in
Tables S1, S2, respectively, at Supplementary Material.

shown in Figure 1D, these two vowels were distinguished by the
state of the tongue, the articulator for which the mounting of the
device was more difficult to standardize.

lips and jaw are free states that can take any value—e.g., (0,1,2)
represents a /d/ and (1,0,2) also does. The occupation levels of the
free states were explored. The discrete state for each consonant
was computed using the intra-subject and intra-session decoding,
for all participants and sessions, and just the VCVs that were
correctly decoding were kept for this analysis. The occupations
of the different consonantal states are shown in Figure 5A.
The /b/ was defined by the lips in state 2; the tongue and
the jaw were free coordinates. The state 2 was not observed
in the tongue, and is presumably incompatible with the motor
gesture of this consonant, however no significant differences
were found between the states 0 and 1 (binomial test with equal
probabilities, p = 0.1). Similarly, for the jaw coordinate the state 0
was underrepresented, with an occupation of the 18%, below the
chance level of 1/3 (binomial test, p < 0.001). The /d/ was defined
by the tongue in state 2; the lips and the jaw were free coordinates.
The lips showed a dominance of the state 1 over the 0 (binomial
test, p < 0.001), and the state 0 of the jaw was significantly less
populated than the others with an occupation of the 8%, lower
than the chance level of 1/3 (binomial test, p < 0.001). The /g/ had
free lips and tongue coordinates. The lips showed no significant
differences between the states 0 and 1 (binomial test with equal
probabilities, p = 0.52), and the state 0 was preferred for the
tongue (binomial test with equal probabilities, p = 0.006).
A well-known effect in the experimental phonology field is
coarticulation, which refers to the modification of the articulation
of the consonants by their neighboring vowels (Hardcastle and
Hewlett, 2006). The occupation levels of the consonants as a
function of their surrounding vowels were calculated (Figure 5B)
and coarticulation effects were revealed. The results showed that,
when the surrounding vowels shared some of the consonant’s free
states, this state was transferred to the consonant. Specifically,
when the previous and following vowels shared the lip state
its value was inherited by the consonants with a free lip’s
coordinate, being /d/ and /g/ (p < 0.001 for the four binomial
tests). Additionally, /b/ inherited the state of the tongue of the

Decoding Performance: Inter-subject and
Inter-session
Next, the robustness of the configuration, regardless anatomical
differences amongst subjects, was tested. Therefore, the VCV
data from all sessions and participants were pooled together and
the 10% of the data was used to fix thresholds (see Table S1).
The confusion matrix of Figure 4C represents the average values
obtained from 50-fold cross-validation. As in the previous case,
the vowel /e/ was mistaken for /a/, revealing that the mounting
of the magnet on the tongue needs to be treated with a more fine
protocol. This result showed that the discretization strategy was
robust even while dealing with different anatomies, suggesting
that the encoding of the sounds of a specific language in a lowdimensional discrete motor space represents a general property
of the speech production system.
Summarizing, the matrices shown in Figure 4 correspond to
a calibration of the discrete decoding system per session (a),
per speaker (b) and a general calibration across speakers and
sessions (c). It is important to notice that only the first one
(a) represents the performance of the prototype as a speech
recognition system. The other two (b, c) are meant to explore
the robustness of the mounting of detectors and magnets, and
the generalization of the motor coordinates across anatomies and
speech habits.

Occupation of the Consonant’s Free States
As pointed out before, vowels and consonants had different ranks
in the discrete representation: while each vowel was represented
by a vertex of the cube of Figure 1D, each consonant was
compatible with many states, shown as the points on the “walls”
surrounding the cube, herein named free state. For example,
the discrete representation for /d/ is (y,x,2), meaning that the

Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org

8

April 2019 | Volume 4 | Article 13

Assaneo et al.

Speech Discrete Anatomical Coordinates

FIGURE 5 | Occupation of the free coordinates. (A) Counts of occurrence of each state, for the complete pool of sessions and participants using the intra-subject
and intra-session thresholds for the discretization. Just the correctly decoded VCVs were kept for this analysis. Columns represent the different consonants (/b/, /d/
and /g/) and rows the articulators (jaw, tongue and lips). Asterisks indicate significant difference between states (p < 0.01 binomial test). (B) Occupation levels of the
free coordinates as a function of the surrounding vowels. Each column represents a consonant and the rows its corresponding free states. For each panel the y-axis
defines the state of the incoming vowel and the x-axis the state of the previous one. Within each panel, each dot represents a corrected decoded consonant, the
darkness of the dot its corresponding state, and its location indicates the pre and post vowel’s state in the corresponding articulator. Also, histograms are displayed
for each combination of states of pre and post vowel. Asterisks indicate a significant difference between states (p < 0.001).

coarticulation was presented by the jaw: for /b/ and /d/ the jaw
was homogeneously occupied by states 1 and 2, regardless of the
states of the surrounding vowels.

surrounding vowels when both shared that state (p < 0.001 for
both binomial tests), and when both vowels shared the tongue
state 0, it was inherited by the /g/ (binomial test, p < 0.001). No

Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org

9

April 2019 | Volume 4 | Article 13

Assaneo et al.

Speech Discrete Anatomical Coordinates

Synthesizing Intelligible Speech From the
Anatomical Recordings

A Discrete Motor Space Representation
This study showed that discretizing three continuous signals
given by the movements of the main articulators of the vocal
tract while vocalizing VCV structures was enough to recover
the phonemic information. This result represents a follow up
of a previous work were the same experimental procedure was
applied over isolated vowels. Here, the discrete motor vowel
representation was validated during continuous speech and the
Spanish stop consonants were integrated to the description.
In order to recover the vowel’s identity, just one threshold
per signal was needed. Thus, the vowels were represented
in the discrete motor space as the corners of a cube.
Curiously, the dimension of the vowel cube (eight) is in
agreement with the number of Cardinal Vowels (McClure,
1972), a set of vocalic sounds used by the phoneticians to
approximate the whole set of cross-language vowels. This
suggests that the discrete motor states captured by this study
could represent the basic motor gestures of vowels. Moreover,
the state on each articulator’s transducer corresponded to an
extreme value along the two-dimensional coordinate system
used by the International Phonetic Alphabet to describe vowels.
Interestingly, the same discrete representation for vowels could
be recovered from direct measurements of human brain activity
during vocalizations (Tankus et al., 2012).
The consonants chosen for this study were /b d g/. They
cause a complete occlusion of the vocal tract produced by
the constriction gesture of one of the three independent oral
articulator sets (lips for /b/, tongue tip for /d/, and tongue body
for /g/). Interestingly, these consonants have been suggested
as the basic units of the articulatory gestures (Browman and
Goldstein, 1989). Therefore, they appear as the natural candidates
to study the presence of discrete information within the
continuous movements of the oral tract.
According to the International Phonetic Alphabet, two
features define the consonants: the place and the manner of
articulation (International Phonetic Association, 1999). This
work focused in the place dimension, since the phoneme selected
cover the three main groups used to describe the place of
articulation of consonants: labial (/b/), coronal (/d/), and dorsal
(/g/). The results revealed the plausibility of recovering the main
place of articulation just by monitoring (and discretizing) the
kinematics of three points in the upper vocal tract. Similarly,
at the brain level, spatial patterns of activity during speech
are known to show a hierarchal organization of phonemes by
articulatory features, with the primary tier of organization being
defined by the three major places of articulation: dorsal, labial, or
coronal (Bouchard et al., 2013).
How the discrete phonemic identity is encoded in the
continuous movements producing speech remains an open
question for the experimental phonology. The presence of
compositional motor units into the continuous articulatory
movements has been widely theorized on the literature
(Browman and Goldstein, 1986, 1990; Saltzman and Munhall,
1989); and some experimental evidence has supported this
hypothesis (Goldrick and Blumstein, 2006; Goldstein et al.,
2007a,b). In this work we recovered a discrete representation
for the complete set of Spanish vowels and stop consonants

One of the goals of this study was to produce synthetic speech
from the recordings of the upper vocal tract movements by
driving an articulatory synthesizer with the signals coming from
the sensors. Moreover, since the discrete representation
successfully decoded the phonemes (see Figure 4), the
synthesizer was driven by Equation (2), instead of by the
raw signals. Since normal speech arises from continuous changes
in the vocal tract, rather than instantaneous passages from
one configuration to the other, it was necessary to get smooth
transitions from one state to the other. Therefore, m = ∞
in Equation (2) were replaced with finite values m1 , m2 , and
m3 , for the lip, jaw, and tongue coordinates, respectively (see
section Materials and Methods). The smooth version of Equation
(2) was used to drive the articulatory synthesizer described in
the Materials and Methods section. More precisely, audio files
were generated by driving the synthesizer with Equation (2)
fed with the transducers’ time traces and the pitch contours
produced by one of the participants while uttering /oga/, /agu/,
/ogu/, /oda/, /odi/, /ide/, /ibu/, /iba/, /obe/ (examples available as
Supplementary Material). Details of this process can be found
in the Materials and Methods section.
Finally, to test the intelligibility of the synthetic speech, the
samples were presented to 15 participants, who were instructed to
write down a VCV structure after listening to each audio file. The
confusion matrices obtained from the transcription are shown
in Figure 6 (see panel A for consonants and B for vowels). All
values were above chance levels (33% for consonants and 20%
for vowels).

DISCUSSION
The current work presented two main findings: (i) a discrete
representation of the vocal gestures for Spanish vowels and
plosive consonants, reconstructed from the direct measurements
of the continuous upper vocal tract movements; and (ii) a
prototype of a speech recognition system, capable of monitoring
the upper vocal tract movements during speech and to decode
and synthesize VCV structures using the discretization strategy.

FIGURE 6 | Confusion matrices for the intelligibility of the synthetic speech.
Rows represent the produced phoneme and columns the transcribed one. (A)
Consonants. (B) Vowels. The color code represents the percentage of
responses for each condition.

Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org

10

April 2019 | Volume 4 | Article 13

Assaneo et al.

Speech Discrete Anatomical Coordinates

from direct measurements of the upper vocal tract movements
during continuous speech. This result links the discrete
information at the brain level with the discrete phonemic space
through the experimental evidence of discrete motor gestures
of speech.

cube). However, in the current state, the device used with the
threshold strategy is not appropriate for languages with a larger
number of vowels. As mentioned above, a possible solution
would be to add sets of thresholds and/or increasing the number
of magnet-transducers.
The state of the art of the techniques used to monitor the
articulatory movements during speech remained stagnant during
the last decades, with some exceptions employing different
technologies to measure the different articulators (Bouchard
et al., 2016). The standard method used to track the articulator’s
displacements during speech is the EMA (Schönle et al., 1987;
Uchida et al., 2014). This technique provides very accurate
recordings (Goozée et al., 2000; Engwall, 2003; Steiner et al.,
2013) at the expenses of being non portable and expensive. Here,
a novel method is introduced and proved to be able to capture the
identity of the uttered phoneme, to detect coarticulation effects
and to correctly drive an articulatory speech synthesizer. This
prototype presents two main advantages: it is portable and is
non-expensive. The portability of the system makes it suitable
for silent speech interface applications; and, crucially, because of
the low cost of its components, it could significantly improve the
speech research done in non-developed countries.

A Novel Device to Track the Vocal Tract
Movements During Continuous Speech
After a short training session, the prototype presented in
this work -the electronic device used with the threshold
strategy to feed the articulatory synthesizer- produced intelligible
speech within the corpus of Spanish vowels and plosive
consonants. Although further work is needed to compare
our prototype with other synthesizers (Heracleous and Hagita,
2011; Bocquelet et al., 2016), it presents two conceptual
advantages: (i) it is portable; and (ii) the motor gestures
involved in the control of the articulatory model are saturating
signals, a shared feature with the brain activation during
speech which represents a clear benefit for brain-computer
interface applications.
From a more general point of view, this implementation
represents an alternative to the extended strategy used in the
bioprosthetic field: large amounts of non-specific physiological
data processed by statistical algorithms to extract relevant
features for vocal instructions (Guenther et al., 2009; Bouchard
et al., 2016). Instead, in the current approach a small set of
recordings from the movements of the speech articulators, in
conjunction with a threshold strategy, were used to control a
biophysical model of the vocal system.
Although this approach showed potential benefits for
bioprothetic applications, further work is needed to optimize the
system. On the one hand, the mounting protocol for the tongue
should be tightened up to get stable thresholds across sessions.
On the other, the protocol should be refined to increase the
phonemic corpus.
Regarding the consonants, several improvements can be
implemented. To distinguish voiced from unvoiced consonants,
different specific sensors (Kim et al., 2011) could be added
to our prototype in order to detect laryngeal vibrations,
such as piezoelectric films adhered to the neck. This would
provide an extra discrete state (for instance, 1 for voiced
and 0 for unvoiced) that would allow to distinguish the
complete set of plosives. In the same way different tools
that detect nasal air flow (Chaaban and Corey, 2011) could
be easily implemented to our device to recognize nasals.
Further work is needed to include other phonemic groups
to the present description, such as the fricatives [s, f,
x], the approximant [l], and the flap [r]. Arguably, the
fricatives could be integrated by including different sets of
thresholds; and increasing the number of magnet-transducer
sets mounted on the vocal tract could retrieve other places
of articulation.
Regarding the vowels, the current vocalic space is complete
for the Spanish language and has the flexibility to be extended
to languages with up to 8 vowels (the dimension of the vowel’s

Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org

DATA AVAILABILITY
Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the
authors. Correspondence and request for materials should be
addressed to MA (fassaneo@gmail.com).

ETHICS STATEMENT
All participants signed an informed consent to participate in
the experiments. The protocol was approved by the CEPI ethics
committee of Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, qualified by
ICH (FDA -USA, European Community, Japan) IRb00003580,
and all methods were performed in accordance with the relevant
guidelines and regulations.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
GM conceived the experiments; GM, MFA, and MT designed
the experiments; MFA ran the experiments; DR, MFA, and MT
coded the synthesizer; MFA and MT analyzed the data and wrote
the manuscript.

FUNDING
This work describes research partially funded by CONICET,
ANCyT, UBA.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcomm.
2019.00013/full#supplementary-material

11

April 2019 | Volume 4 | Article 13

Assaneo et al.

Speech Discrete Anatomical Coordinates

REFERENCES

brain injury using electromagnetic articulography. Brain Inj. 14, 153–174.
doi: 10.1080/026990500120817
Guenther, F. H., Brumberg, J. S., Wright, E. J., Nieto-Castanon, A., Tourville, J. A.,
and Panko, M. (2009). A wireless brain-machine interface for real-time speech
synthesis. PLoS ONE 4:e8218. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008218
Hardcastle, W. J., and Hewlett, N. (2006). Coarticulation: Theory,
Data and Techniques. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511486395
Heracleous, P., and Hagita, N. (2011). “Automatic recognition of speech without
any audio information,” in 2011 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing (Prague), 2392–2395.
Hueber, T., Benaroya, E.-L., Chollet, G., Dreyfus, G., and Stone, M. (2010).
Development of a silent speech interface driven by ultrasound and
optical images of the tongue and lips. Speech Commun. 52, 288–300.
doi: 10.1016/j.specom.2009.11.004
International Phonetic Association (1999). Handbook of the International Phonetic
Association. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kim, D. H., Lu, N., Ma, R., Kim, Y.S., Kim, R.H., Wang, S., et al. (2011). Epidermal
electronics. Science 333, 838–843. doi: 10.1126/science.1206157
Laje, R., Gardner, T., and Mindlin, G. (2001). Continuous model for vocal
fold oscillations to study the effect of feedback. Phys. Rev. E 64, 1–7.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.64.056201
Landau, L. D., and Lifshitz, E. M. (1987). Fluid Mechanics. Rochester, NY: Image.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1993). Speaking: From Intention to Articulation. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Liljencrants, J. (1985). Speech Synthesis With a Reflection-Type Line Analog.
Stockholm: Royal Institute of Technology.
Lloyd, J. E., Stavness, I., and Fels, S. (2012). “ArtiSynth: a fast interactive
biomechanical modeling toolkit combining multibody and finite element
simulation,” in Soft Tissue Biomechanical Modeling for Computer Assisted
Surgery, 355–394.
Maeda, S. (1990). Compensatory articulation during speech: evidence from the
analysis and synthesis of vocal-tract shapes using an articulatory model. Speech
Prod. Speech Model. 131–149. doi: 10.1007/978-94-009-2037-8_6
McClure, J. D. (1972). A suggested revision for the Cardinal Vowel system. J. Int.
Phon. Assoc. 2, 20–25. doi: 10.1017/S0025100300000402
Meltzner, G. S., Colby, G., Deng, Y., and Heaton, J. T. (2011). “Signal acquisition
and processing techniques for sEMG based silent speech recognition,” in
Proceedings of the Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society, EMBS (Boston, MA).
Murphy, D., Kelloniemi, A., Mullen, J., and Shelley, S. (2007). Acoustic modeling
using the digital waveguide mesh. IEEE Signal Process. Magazine. 24, 55–66.
doi: 10.1109/MSP.2007.323264
Petkov, C. I., and Jarvis, E. D. (2012). Birds, primates, and spoken language origins:
behavioral phenotypes and neurobiological substrates. Front. Evol. Neurosci.
4:12 doi: 10.3389/fnevo.2012.00012
Press, W. H., Teukolsky, S. A., Vetterling, W. T., and Flannery, B. P. (2007).
Numerical Recipes 3rd Edition: The Art of Scientific Computing. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Saltzman, E. L., and Munhall, K. G. (1989). A dynamical approach to
gestural patterning in speech production. Ecol. Psychol. 1, 333–382.
doi: 10.1207/s15326969eco0104_2
Schönle, P. W., Gräbe, K., Wenig, P., Höhne, J., Schrader, J., and Conrad, B. (1987).
Electromagnetic articulography: use of alternating magnetic fields for tracking
movements of multiple points inside and outside the vocal tract. Brain Lang.
31, 26–35. doi: 10.1016/0093-934X(87)90058-7
Schultz, T., Wand, M., Hueber, T., Krusienski, D. J., Herff, C., and Brumberg, J.
S. (2017). Biosignal-based spoken communication: a survey. IEEE/ACM Trans.
Audio Speech Lang. Proc. 25, 2257–2271.
Steiner, I., Richmond, K., and Ouni, S. (2013). Speech animation using
electromagnetic articulography as motion capture data. In 12th IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing
(Vancouver, BC), 55–60.
Stevens, K. N. (2000). Acoustic Phonetics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stone, S., and Birkholz, P. (2016). “Silent-speech command word recognition using
electro-optical stomatography,” in Proceedings of the Annual Conference
of the International Speech Communication Association, Interspeech
(San Francisco, CA).

Aronson, L., Furmanski, H. M., Rufiner, L., and Estienne, P. (2000). Características
acústicas de las vocales del español rioplatense. Fonoaudiológica 46,
12–20.
Assaneo, M. F., Sigman, M., Cohen, L., and Trevisan, M. A. (2016).
Exploring the anatomical encoding of voice with a mathematical model of
the vocal system. Neuroimage 141, 31–39. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.
07.033
Assaneo, M. F., Trevisan, M. A., and Mindlin, G. B. (2013). Discrete
motor coordinates for vowel production. PLoS ONE 8:e80373.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080373
Birkholz, P., Martin, L., Xu, Y., Scherbaum, S., and Neuschaefer-Rube, C. (2017).
Manipulation of the prosodic features of vocal tract length, nasality and
articulatory precision using articulatory synthesis. Comput. Speech Lang. 41,
116–127. doi: 10.1016/j.csl.2016.06.004
Bocquelet, F., Hueber, T., Girin, L., Savariaux, C., and Yvert, B. (2016). Realtime control of an articulatory-based speech synthesizer for brain computer
interfaces. PLoS Comput. Biol. 12:e1005119. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.
1005119
Boersma, P., and Weenink, D. (2011). Praat: Doing Phonetics by Computer.
Bouchard, K. E., Conant, D. F., Anumanchipalli, G. K., Dichter, B.,
Chaisanguanthum, K. S., and Johnson, K. (2016). High-resolution, noninvasive imaging of upper vocal tract articulators compatible with human brain
recordings. PLoS ONE 11:e0151327. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151327
Bouchard, K. E., Mesgarani, N., Johnson, K., and Chang, E. F. (2013). Functional
organization of human sensorimotor cortex for speech articulation. Nature 495,
327–332. doi: 10.1038/nature11911
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spat. Vis. 10, 433–436.
doi: 10.1163/156856897X00357
Browman, C., and Goldstein, L. M. (1986). Towards an articulatory phonology.
Phonol. Yearb. 3, 219–252. doi: 10.1017/S0952675700000658
Browman, C. P., and Goldstein, L. (1989). Articulatory gestures as phonological
units. Phonology 6, 201–251. doi: 10.1017/S0952675700001019
Browman, C. P., and Goldstein, L. (1990). “Tiers in articulatory phonology, with
some implications for casual speech,” in Papers in Laboratory Phonology, eds
J. Kingston and M. E. Beckman (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press),
341–376.
Brumberg, J. S., Nieto-Castanon, A., Kennedy, P. R., and Guenther, F. H. (2010).
Brain-computer interfaces for speech communication. Speech Commun. 52,
367–379. doi: 10.1016/j.specom.2010.01.001
Chaaban, M., and Corey, J. P. (2011). Assessing nasal air flow: options and utility.
Proc. Am. Thorac. Soc. 8, 70–78. doi: 10.1513/pats.201005-034RN
Denby, B., Schultz, T., Honda, K., Hueber, T., Gilbert, J. M., and Brumberg,
J. S. (2010). Silent speech interfaces. Speech Commun. 52, 270–287.
doi: 10.1016/j.specom.2009.08.002
Deng, Y., Colby, G., Heaton, J. T., and Meltzner, G. S. (2012). “Signal
processing advances for the MUTE sEMG-based silent speech recognition
system,” in Proceedings - IEEE Military Communications Conference MILCOM.
(Orlando, FL)
Engwall, O. (2003). Combining, MRI, EMA and EPG measurements in
a three-dimensional tongue model. Speech Commun. 41, 303–329.
doi: 10.1016/S0167-6393(02)00132-2
Flanagan, J. L. (2013). Speech Analysis Synthesis and Perception. Berlin; Heidelberg:
Springer Science & Business Media.
Goldrick, M., and Blumstein, S. E. (2006). Cascading activation from phonological
planning to articulatory processes: evidence from tongue twisters. Lang. Cogn.
Process. 21, 649–683. doi: 10.1080/01690960500181332
Goldsmith, J., Riggle, J., and Yu, A. C. L. (2011). The Handbook of Phonological
Theory, 2nd Edn. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons
Goldstein, L., Chitoran, I., and Selkirk, E. (2007a). Syllable structure as coupled
oscillator modes: evidence from Georgian vs. Tashlhiyt Berber. Proc. XVI Int.
Congr. Phon. Sci. 241–244.
Goldstein, L., Pouplier, M., Chen, L., Saltzman, E., and Byrd, D. (2007b).
Dynamic action units slip in speech production errors. Cognition 103, 386–412.
doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2006.05.010
Goozée, J. V., Murdoch, B. E., Theodoros, D. G., and Stokes, P. D. (2000).
Kinematic analysis of tongue movements in dysarthria following traumatic

Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org

12

April 2019 | Volume 4 | Article 13

Assaneo et al.

Speech Discrete Anatomical Coordinates

Toda, T., Nakagiri, M., and Shikano, K. (2012). “Statistical voice conversion
techniques for body-conducted unvoiced speech enhancement,” in Proceedings
of the Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication
Association.
Tran, V. A., Bailly, G., Lœvenbruck, H., and Toda, T. (2010). Improvement to
a NAM-captured whisper-to-speech system. Speech Commun. 52, 314–326.
doi: 10.1016/j.specom.2009.11.005
Uchida, H., Wakamiya, K., and Kaburagi, T. (2014). “A study on the improvement
of measurement accuracy of the three-dimensional electromagnetic
articulography,” in Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International
Speech Communication Association, INTERSPEECH (Singapore), 726–730.

Story, B., and Titze, I. R. (1996). Parametrization of vocal tract area functions
by empirical orthogonal modes. Natl. Cent. Voice Speech Status Prog. Rep.
10, 9–23.
Story, B. H. (1995). Physiologically-Based Speech Simulation Using an Enhanced
Wave-Reflection Model of the Vocal Tract. Ph.D. thesis, The University of Iowa.
Story, B. H. (2005). A parametric model of the vocal tract area function for vowel
and consonant simulation. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 117:3231. doi: 10.1121/1.18
69752
Story, B. H. (2013). Phrase-level speech simulation with an airway modulation
model of speech production. Comput. Speech Lang. 27, 989–1010.
doi: 10.1016/j.csl.2012.10.005
Story, B. H., and Titze, I. R. (1995). Voice simulation with a body-cover model of
the vocal folds. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 97, 1249–1260. doi: 10.1121/1.412234
Story, B. H., Titze, I. R., and Hoffman, E. A. (1996). Vocal tract area
functions from magnetic resonance imaging. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 100, 537–554.
doi: 10.1121/1.415960
Tankus, A., Fried, I., and Shoham, S. (2012). Structured neuronal encoding
and decoding of human speech features. Nat. Commun. 3:1015.
doi: 10.1038/ncomms1995
Titze, I. R. (1994). Principles of Voice Production. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Titze, I. R., and Martin, D. W. (1998). Principles of voice production. J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 104, 1148–1148.

Frontiers in Communication | www.frontiersin.org

Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Assaneo, Ramirez Butavand, Trevisan and Mindlin. This is an
open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
with these terms.

13

April 2019 | Volume 4 | Article 13

